# Original API

Jump to [examples to get you started](#examples).

## Simple API queries


The simpler of the available API calls provide ways to extract useful
information from a single database table in various formats.  CSV
(comma-separated values) format is of particular interest, as it is a format
that is easy to view and use in any spreadsheet software and in R.  Other
possible formats are JSON and XML.

In the discussion that follows, most URLs given as examples are clickable; the
results of the various API calls represented by these URLs will then be viewable
in a browser.

In most of these calls, we will write the URLs to request results in XML format
rather than in CSV format.  This is mainly for convenience: requests for XML
format will usually display the result in the browser whereas requests for CSV
format will download a CSV file.  If, however, you want to see what the result
would be in either of the other two formats, this is easy to do: After clicking
the link and seeing the XML result in the browser, go into the browser's address
box and manually edit the URL there, replacing the .xml extension with .json or
.csv as desired.

### A simple example

Data can be requested as a CSV, XML, or JSON file, and data from previously
published syntheses can be requested without logging in.  In the simplest case,
we can use a single key-value pair to filter the table, restricting the result
to the set of rows having a given value in a given column.  For example, to
download all of the trait data for the switchgrass species Panicum virgatum, we
must first look up the id number of the Panicum virgatum species.  We can do
this by querying the species table by issuing a call to this URL[^apikey-note]

{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?scientificname=Panicum+virgatum

and then examining the "id" value of the one species in the result.  Once we
have the id, we can use it in a query to the traits table:

{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/traits.xml?specie_id=938 [^specie_id_note]

The reason we must use this two-stage process is that the traits table doesn't
contain the species name information directly.

_**Caveat!** There is no guarantee that these id numbers will not change!_
Although it is unlikely that the id number for Panicum virgatum will change
between the time we query the species table to look it up and the time we use it
to query the traits table, it entirely possible that if we run the query
{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/traits.xml?specie_id=938 a year from now, the result will be
for an entirely different species!  For this and other reasons, it is worthwhile
learning how to do cross-table queries.



## Complex API Queries

The API allows more complex queries and faster programmatic access by including
multiple search terms in the query string of the URL.  This feature is (for
example) used to access BETYdb via the [Ropensci `traits`
package](https://github.com/ropensci/rotraits/issues/3).

### A brief summary of the syntax of URL-based queries:

* The portion of the URL directly following {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/ determines the
  primary table being queried and the format of the query result.  For example,
  {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/traits.json would obtain results from the traits table in
  JSON format and {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/yields.xml would get results from the
  yields table in XML format.

* As a special case, to query the SQL view `traits_and_yields_view`, use
  "search" in place of the table name.  For example,
  {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.json returns the rows of this view in JSON format.

* The URL {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/traits.csv will download the entire traits table
  (or rather, that portion of the table which the user is permitted to access)
  in CSV format.  To restrict the results, we use a _query string_, which is the
  portion of the URL after the question mark.  The query string consists of one
  or more clauses of the form `<key>=<value>` separated by `&` characters.  For
  example, to obtain only the portion of the traits table associated with the
  site having id 99, the species having id 938, and the citation having id 45,
  we could write
  {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/traits.csv?site_id=99&specie_id=938&citation_id=45.  Note
  that restrictions are cummulative: each clause further restricts the result of
  applying the previous restriction.  In general, there is no way of
  taking the disjunction of multiple clausesâ€”that is, there is not way of
  "OR-ing" the clauses together (but see the next item).

* In queries on `traits_and_yields_view`, in addition to being able to use
  column names as keys, you can also use the special key `search`.[^search_note]
  This matches against multiple columns at once, and the query succeeds if each
  word in the search string matches any portion of one of the column values in
  the list of searched columns.  Moreover, these matches are not case-sensitive.
  For full details, see the [appendix](appendix_a.md).

* URLs can not contain spaces.  If the value you are querying against contains a
   space, substitute `+` or `%20` in the URL.  Thus, above we had to write the
   query URL as {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.csv?scientificname=Panicum+virgatum.
   We couldn't have written it as
   {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.csv?scientificname=Panicum&nbsp;virgatum.


### Cross-table queries

It is possible to write queries involving multiple tables, but compared with the
full expressive power of SQL, this ability is somewhat limited.  Nevertheless,
most common queries of interest should be possible.  Here is a short outline of
the scope and syntax of such queries:

* In any multiple-table query, there is always a "primary" table.  This
  corresponds to the name directly following the hostname portion of the URL.
  For example, in a query of the form
  {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/yields.csv?specie_id=938&..., "yields" is the primary
  table of the query.

* Other tables involved in the query must be related to the primary table in one
  of the following three ways: (1) The primary table has a foreign key column
  that refers to the other table.  For example, the `citation_id` column of the
  yields table refers to the citations table, so we can include the citations
  table in any query on the yields table.[^associations] (2) The other table has
  a foreign key referring to the primary table.  For example, we could involve
  the cultivars table in any query where species is the primary table because
  the cultivars table has a `specie_id` column.  (3) There is a join table
  connecting the primary table to the other table.  For example, because the
  `citations_sites` table joins the citations table with the sites table, a
  query with `citations` as the primary table is allowed to include the sites
  table.  Visit {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/schemas to view a list of the tables
  (including join tables) of BETYdb.  Click on a table name to see a list of its
  columns.

* For each "other" table involved in the query, there must be a clause in the
  query string of the URL of the form `include[]=other`.  The "other" portion of
  this clause is either (1) the name of the other table, or (2) the singular
  form of the name of the other table.  Which of these two to use depends on
  whether a row of the primary table may be associated with multiple rows of the
  other table (case 1) or whether a row of the primary table is always
  associated with at most one row of the associated table (case 2).  An easy
  rule of thumb here is to use the singular form if the primary table has a
  foreign key column referring to the other table and to use the bona fide
  (actual) table name otherwise.[^table_relation_rule] Note that for the
  purposes of this syntactical requirement (and contrary to reality), "specie"
  is the singular form of "species".  Note you _must_ include the square
  brackets after "include"!

* "include[]-ing" another table in a query allows the query to filter query
  results based on column values in that other table.  But to do so, the "key"
  portion of the filter clause must be of the form `<other table name>.<column
  name>`.  (Note that keys referring to column values in the _primary_ table may
  use, but do not require, the table name qualifier.)

* "include[]-ing" another table in a query has another effect in the case of XML
  and JSON-formatted results: The associated row(s) from the included table are
  included with each entity of the primary table the query returns.  For
  example, consider the query
  {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/cultivars.xml?species.genus=Salix&include[]=specie.  Not
  only will this return all cultivars for any species with genus Salix, it will
  return detailed species information for each cultivar returned.  Contrast this
  with the CSV-format query
  {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/cultivars.csv?species.genus=Salix&include[]=specie.  This
  returns the same cultivars as before, but we only get the information
  contained in the cultivars table.  In particular, while we will get the value
  of `specie_id` for each returned cultivar, we won't get the corresponding
  species name.

A few points need to be made about how cross-table queries work.

1. Suppose the primary table is in a many-to-one relationship with the _other_
table.  Then if we include a clause of the form `<other table name>.<column
name>=value`, a row of the primary table is selected precisely when `<other
table name>.<column name>=value` for at least one associated row from the other
table.  For example, in the query
https://www.betydb.org/citations.xml?author=Clifton-Brown&include[]=sites&sites.city=Lisbon,
the citations returned will be all and only those where the author is
Clifton-Brown and where at least one of the associated sites is in the city
Lisbon.

2. As mentioned above, in the case of XML and JSON-formatted results, full
information is given about associated rows from the other table(s).  In the
example just given, for each citation of Clifton-Brown associated with some
site(s) in Lisbon, we will see full information about those sites in the
results.  Other sites associated with the same citation but not in Lisbon,
however, will not be shown.

3. You can add an `include[]=other` clause without any corresponding filter
clauses.  This will not filter out any results but _will_ add in information
from the other table (except when the return format is CSV).  For example, the
query https://www.betydb.org/citations.xml?author=Clifton-Brown&include[]=sites
shows the same citations as the query
https://www.betydb.org/citations.xml?author=Clifton-Brown, but it will, in
addition, show full information about all of the sites associated with each of
the selected citations.

4. Even if the singular form of the table name must be used in the
`include[]=other` clause, the _actual_ table name must be used in the `<other
table name>.<column name>=value` filtering clause.


Some examples will make the query syntax clearer. In all of these examples, you
can interchange `.json` with `.xml` or `.csv` depending on the format that you
want.


### Examples

1. Return all trait data for "Panicum virgatum" without having to know its species id number:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/traits.xml?include[]=specie&species.scientificname=Panicum+virgatum

    This will return exactly the same traits as the query in [simple
    example](#a-simple-example) above that used the specie\_id number (but with
    added species information; if CSV format is used instead, _exactly_ the same
    result files are returned).

1. Note that the result of the previous query contains much redundancy: full
information about species _Panicum virgatum_ is included with each trait
returned.  The following query will only show the Panicum virgatum species
information once:

     {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?scientificname=Panicum+virgatum&include[]=traits

    This returns a single result from the species tableâ€”the row information for
    Panicum virgatumâ€”but nested inside this result is a list of all trait rows
    associated with that species.

    In CSV mode, this option is not available to us.  CSV format only shows
    information extracted from the primary table.  In CSV mode, an
    "include[]=other\_table" clause is useless unless you are going to use the
    included table to filter the returned results by also including a clause of
    the form "other\_table.column\_name=column\_value".

1. Return all citations in JSON format (replace .json with .xml or .csv for
those formats):

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations.json

1. Return all yield data for the genus _Miscanthus_:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/yields.xml?include[]=specie&species.genus=Miscanthus

    If we're only interested in Miscanthus having species name "sinensis", we can do:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/yields.xml?include[]=specie&species.genus=Miscanthus&species.species=sinensis

    As in the first example, this query will show the same species information multiple timesâ€”once for each yield.

    Once again, we may remedy this by making _species_ the primary table:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?genus=Miscanthus&include[]=yields
    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?genus=Miscanthus&species=sinensis&include[]=yields

    These each return a list of Miscanthus species where each species item
    itself contains a list of yields for that species.  Since species and yields
    are in a one-to-many relationship, each species is only listed once.

1. Return all yield data associated with the citation Heaton 2008:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations.xml?include[]=yields&author=Heaton&year=2008

    To get this information in CSV format, we have to use yields as the primary table:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/yields.csv?include[]=citation&citations.author=Heaton&citations.year=2008

    Note that we use the singular form "citation" in the include clause (since
    there is one citation per yield), but the qualified column names
    "citations.author" and "citations.year" must always use the actual database
    table name.

1. Find species associated with the _salix_ plant functional type:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/pfts.xml?include[]=specie&pfts.name=salix

    You can also do the query like so:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?include[]=pfts&pfts.name=salix

    The results of these two queries contain essentially the same
    information.  And to emphasize that we only need to interchange the primary
    and included table names to get from one query to the other, we have used
    the fully-qualified column name "pfts.name" in both (though just "name"
    would suffice in the first).

    The form of the results of the two queries is rather different.  It is
    instructive to compare them.  The first form is better for use with XML and
    JSON.  It doesn't repeat the same PFT information over and over again inside
    each species listing.  But the second form is the only one we can use with
    CSV format if we want to get any species information at all.

1. Return all citations with their associated sites:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations.xml?include[]=sites

    (Note that we use the plural form "sites" in the include clause since citations and sites are in a many to many relationship.)

1. Return all citations with their associated sites and yields:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations.xml?include[]=sites&include[]=yields

    _Note that this will take considerable time since the information for all
    yields rows will be displayed._ Note also that the result of this query will
    not tell us directly which site is associated with which yield (although the
    yield result will have a site\_id column, which will tell us indirectly).

1. Return all citations by author Lewandowski in the journal _European Journal
of Agronomy_ along with their associated sites and yields.

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations.xml?journal=European+Journal+of+Agronomy&author=Lewandowski&include[]=sites&include[]=yields

1. Return citation 1 in json format:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations/1.json

    Alternatively, we can do:

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations.json?id=1

    This second result is slightly different: It returns a JSON array with a
    single item instead of the item itself.

10. Return citation 1 in json format with itâ€™s associated sites

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations/1.json?include[]=sites

11. Return citation 1 in json format with itâ€™s associated sites and yields

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/citations/1.json?include[]=sites&include[]=yields

Regarding the last three examples, although the syntax for returning data
associated with a single entity (citation 1 in these examples) is very
convenient, in general it is best not to rely on fixed id numbers for entities.
"The citation in _Agronomy Journal_ with author Adler" is a more reliable
locator than "The citation with id 1".

## Avoiding Cross-Table Queries: Using the Traits and Yields View

The database view `traits_and_yields_view` provides summary information about
traits and yields: It combines information from the traits and the yields
tables, and it includes information from six associated tablesâ€”namely, the
_sites_, _species_, _citations_, _treatments_, _variables_, and _users_ tables.
Whereas the traits and the yields tables contain only pointers to these tables
(foreign keys in the form of id numbers), the `traits_and_yields_view` directly
contains information associated with a trait or yield such as the name of the
species of the plant whose trait was measured, the name of the measured
variable, and the author and year of the citation associated with the trait or
yield.  This means that in many cases, a query of the `traits_and_yields_view`
may be used to extract information that otherwise would require a complex
cross-table query with traits or yields as the primary table.

Moreover, by using the special `search=` key in place of column names, one can
avoid the strict matching that is used when column names are used as keys.  For
example,

{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.xml?search=cottongrass

will return all traits and yields for which the common name of the species
includes the word "cottongrass".  To get the same rows using `commonname` as the
key, we would have to do three separate searches:

{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.xml?commonname=tussock+cottongrass

{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.xml?commonname=white+cottongrass

{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.xml?commonname=tall+cottongrass

This is because when we use a column name as the search key, the value must
match the column value exactly (including the letter case and the number of
spaces between words).[^fuzzy_matching_in_beta_api]

### Including Unchecked Data in the Traits and Yields View

By default, searches on `traits_and_yields_view` return only checked data.  The
Web interface now has a checkbox labelled "include unchecked records" that the
user may check to override this default.  To do the same thing through the API,
the user must include a clause of the form `include_unchecked=true` in the query
string.  (Any of "TRUE", "yes", "YES", "y", "Y", "1", "t", "T" may be used in
place of "true" here.)

### A Few Notes about Searching the Traits and Yields View

1. The base URL to use is {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search

1. You can use _column name_ keys only when the result format is XML or JSON.
If the result format is CSV or HTML, any query-string clause of the form
`<columnname>=<value>` is ignored.

1. The query-string clauses of the form `search=<value>` and
`include_unchecked=true` may be used with all result formats.

1. If multiple `search=<value>` clauses are included, only last one is used.
**Don't do this!** To search on multiple terms, separate them in the query
string by `+` signs.  For example,
{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.xml?search=LTER+cottongrass&include_unchecked=true
will likely find traits and yields results for cottongrass species at LTER
(Long-term Ecological Research) sites, including those that have not been
checked.

1. As noted in the [Web Interface
Search](advanced_search.md#basic-search-searching-from-the-home-page) section,
each word in the value of a `search=<value>` clause must match one of the
columns `sitename`, `city`, `scientificname`, `commonname`, `cultivar` `author`,
`trait`, `trait_description`, `citation_year`, or `entity` in order for a given
row to be included in the search results.  Recall that a word in the value of
the search string _matches_ a column value if it is textually included in it.

1. Remember that values for column name keys are treated very differently from
the way the value of the `search` key is treated.  In particular, the value is
treated as one unit.  Consider the difference between these two examples: In the
search

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.xml?commonname=white+willow

    the search string "white willow" is treated as a unit, and this search will
    return only rows pertaining to the species with commonname "white willow".
    But in the search

    {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/search.xml?search=white+willow

    the words "white" and "willow" are considered separately.  So this search
    will in addition return (for example) rows for white ash at a site called
    Willow Creek (US-WCr) because "white" matches the species name and "willow"
    matches the site name.

---

[^apikey-note]: In all of the examples in this section, we have written the query URLs as though they are to be run in a web browser after having logged in to the BETYdb web site.  To run these queries from the command line or in a script, you must either pass login creditials with the HTTP call or include a valid API key in the URL (see the section on [API keys](Api.html#api-keys)).

Using the command-line program `curl` as an example, we could, instead of
visiting {{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?scientificname=Panicum+virgatum in
a Web browser, issue the `curl` command

<!--- See https://github.com/GitbookIO/gitbook/issues/707 for why we can't use the usual Markdown syntax --->
<pre><code class="lang-bash">
curl -u &lt;your login&gt;:&lt;your password&gt; "{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?scientificname=Panicum+virgatum"
</code></pre>
or, using an API key instead of the `-u` option,

<pre><code class="lang-bash">
curl "{{book.BETYdb_URL}}/species.xml?scientificname=Panicum+virgatum?key=yourAPIkey"
</code></pre>

[^specie_id_note]: Note the name of the key `specie_id` (which should rightfully be called `species_id`).  This naming is an unfortunate artifact of Rails default schema for naming foreign keys.

[^search_note]: When searching in HTML format (the normal format when using the search page in the browser) column name parameters are ignored; only the value of the "search" parameters is significant.  For a full list of which columns can be search in which contexts, and of all the search parameters that may be used, consult the [appendix](appendix_a.md).

[^associations]: In reality, it is not `citation_id`'s being a foreign key referencing the `id` column of the `citations` table which is the determining factor here.  Rather, it is a Rails construct that determines whether one table is associated with another.  In this example, it is a line in the Yield modelâ€”`belongs_to :citation`â€”that connects the citations table with the yields table.  Similarly, it is the fact that the `Specie` model has the `has_many :cultivars` that allows us to bring in columns from the cultivars table when querying the species table.  In general, the Rails relations correspond to the SQL ones, but this isn't always the case.  For a full listing of Rails associations, see the [appendix](appendix_a.md).

[^table_relation_rule]: The "real" rule is: use the singular form if the Rails model for the table has a line of the form `belongs_to <singular form of other table>`, and use the actual table name if the Rails model has a line of the form `has_many <other table>`.  See the preceding footnote.

[^fuzzy_matching_in_beta_api]: The newer [beta api](API/beta_API.md) offers less strict methods of matching by column values.
